Adds Heartbeat and GetMessages methods to the protocol (#1462)
dedis/popstellar: docs/protocol.md

```

</details>

## Sending a heartbeat message to servers

🧭 **RPC Message** > **Query** > **Heartbeat**

A server sends a heartbeat to its peers in order to attest that: 

- it is alive

> - it received a certain set of messages

Reviewer: Our idea was to include every type of message in the heartbeat (both received and sent), as it should be the expression of the server's internal state

> - it received a certain set of messages

Reviewer 2: Yep, I was confused by the `certain` 😅

> Heartbeat are to be sent based on channel activity and time intervals.  

Reviewer 2: i.e. after a given threshold of messages have been sent or a given amount of time has passed since the last heartbeat? Or do I misunderstand this sentence? :)

Assuming this is what's meant, when is the first heartbeat sent / when does this timer start?

Reviewer: The idea is to have a combination of both. Let's say the threshold of messages is reached before the timeout is expired, then we can send the heartbeat and then restart the timer. This is just a possible approach, we discussed some others today, but for now I guess we will start by simply implementing a very simple approach (every X ms send the heartbeat). The timer can start when we receive the first createLao from the organizer or an heartbeat from another server, but also this one is a wip approach. In that sense we will add details to the doc as we plan a clear and more defined working strategy.

RPC 

```json5
// ../protocol/examples/query/heartbeat/heartbeat.json

{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "id": 5,
    "method": "heartbeat",
    "params": {

>         "maps": [

Reviewer 2: Why is the name "maps"? Because it contains the messages per channel? The I'd name it something like that, i.e. "messages_by_id"?

                        "properties": {
                            "channel": {
                                "description": "[String] name of the channel",
                                "type": "string",
                                "pattern": "^/root(/[^/]+)*$"
                            },
                            "ids": {
                                "description": "[Array] of message_ids corresponding to that channel",
                                "type": "array",
                                "items": {
                                    "type": "string"
                                }
                            }
                        },
                        "required": ["channel", "ids"]
                    }
                }
            },
            "required": ["maps"]
        },
        "jsonrpc": {
            "$comment": "Defined by the parent, but needed here for the validation"
        },

        "id": {
            "type": "integer"
        }
    },
    "required": ["method", "params", "id", "jsonrpc"]
}

```
</details>

## Retrieving messages from server using ids 

🧭 **RPC Message** > **Query** > **getMessagesById**
  

> This call is generally triggered upon the reception of a hearbeat message, in case the server hasn't already delivered some of the messages contained in such heartbeat but it could also used in other contexts. The purpose is to request missed messages so far.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This call is generally triggered upon the reception of a hearbeat message, in case the server hasn't already received some of the messages contained in such heartbeat but it could also used in other contexts. The purpose is to request missed messages so far.
```
?

I would swap the two sentences, i.e. first describe what it does and then why/when it is used.

Also what message is used to send the answer to a `getMessagesById` query?

Reviewer: The answer for that query is in getMessagesById_ans.json, it's basically the same as the heartbeat but with messages instead of ids

RPC 

```json5
// ../protocol/examples/query/getMessagesById/getMessagesById.json

{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "id": 6,
    "method": "getMessagesById",
    "params": {

>         "maps": [

Reviewer 2: Same comment as before:

Why is the name "maps"? Because it contains the messages per channel? The I'd name it something like that, i.e. "messages_by_id"?

}

```

The heartbeat can then trigger the internal logic of a server: when it receives message ids that it has not already delivered it will execute a `get_messages_by_id` RPC. However, this is just a consequence of that specific condition, normally the heartbeat is just a way to communicate to others that the sender is alive, thus it doesn't expect any answer back.

<details>
<summary>
💡 See the full specification
</summary>
  
```json5
// ../protocol/query/method/heartbeat.json

{
    "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
    "$id": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dedis/popstellar/master/protocol/query/method/heartbeat.json",
    "description": "Heartbeat message",
    "type": "object",
    "additionalProperties": false,
    "properties": {
        "method": {
            "description": "[String] operation to be performed by the query",
            "const": "heartbeat"
        },
        "params": {
            "description": "[Array] of objects containing each a channel and the list of ids from that channel",
            "type": "object",
            "additionalProperties": false,
            "properties": {
                "message_ids_by_channel_id": {

>                     "type": "array",

Reviewer 3: Yes, this makes sense. Pattern properties is supported in JSON Schema version draft-07, so I made the change to use a map instead.

                            "channel": {
                                "description": "[String] name of the channel",
                                "type": "string",
                                "pattern": "^/root(/[^/]+)*$"
                            },
                            "message_ids": {
                                "description": "[Array] of message_ids corresponding to that channel",
                                "type": "array",
                                "items": {
                                    "type": "string"
                                }
                            }
                        },
                        "required": ["channel", "message_ids"]
                    }
                }
            },
            "required": ["message_ids_by_channel_id"]
        },
        "jsonrpc": {
            "$comment": "Defined by the parent, but needed here for the validation"
        },

        "id": {
            "type": "integer"
        }
    },
    "required": ["method", "params", "id", "jsonrpc"]
}

```
</details>

## Retrieving messages from server using ids 

🧭 **RPC Message** > **Query** > **Get messages by their ids**
  

> The purpose of this RPC is to request missed messages so far.

Reviewer 4: From a protocol perspective, try to define first and foremost what the RPC does and allow, not how it is used. It's the property of any API that eventually it'll get used for something vastly different 😁 In this case, we can easily anticipate that eventually the clients might use this.

A suggested better description:

```suggestion
The purpose of this RPC is to selectively retrieve multiple messages by their ID. This allows the caller to only retrieve the messages it doesn't already have.
```

This call is generally triggered upon the reception of a hearbeat message, in case the server hasn't already received some of the messages contained in such heartbeat but it could also used in other contexts. 

RPC 

```json5
// ../protocol/examples/query/get_messages_by_id/get_messages_by_id.json

{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "id": 6,
    "method": "get_messages_by_id",
    "params": {
        "message_ids_by_channel_id": [
            {
                "channel": "/root/nLghr9_P406lfkMjaNWqyohLxOiGlQee8zad4qAfj18=/social/8qlv4aUT5-tBodKp4RszY284CFYVaoDZK6XKiw9isSw=",
                "message_ids": ["DCBX48EuNO6q-Sr42ONqsj7opKiNeXyRzrjqTbZ_aMI="]
            },
            {
                "channel": "/root/nLghr9_P406lfkMjaNWqyohLxOiGlQee8zad4qAfj18=/HnXDyvSSron676Icmvcjk5zXvGLkPJ1fVOaWOxItzBE=",
                "message_ids": [
                    "z6SbjJ0Hw36k8L09-GVRq4PNmi06yQX4e8aZRSbUDwc=",
                    "txbTmVMwCDkZdoaAiEYfAKozVizZzkeMkeOlzq5qMlg="
                ]
            }
        ]
    }
}

```

Response (in case of success)

```json5
// ../protocol/examples/answer/get_messages_by_id_ans.json

{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "id": 6,
    "result": {

>         "messages_by_channel_id": [

Reviewer 4: did you have something specific in mind when you added an object with a single field (messages_by_channel_id) wrapping the actual result ?

Reviewer 3: I think the problem was that `array` was not an accepted type but `object` was. But since we are using a map now this is no longer a problem.

                "messages": []
            },
            {
                "channel": "/root/nLghr9_P406lfkMjaNWqyohLxOiGlQee8zad4qAfj18=/HnXDyvSSron676Icmvcjk5zXvGLkPJ1fVOaWOxItzBE=",
                "messages": []
            }
        ]
    }
}

```

<details>
<summary>
💡 See the full specification
</summary>
  
```json5
// ../protocol/query/method/get_messages_by_id.json

{
    "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
    "$id": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dedis/popstellar/master/protocol/query/method/get_messages_by_id.json",
    "description": "Request messages by their ids",
    "type": "object",
    "additionalProperties": false,
    "properties": {
        "method": {
            "description": "[String] operation to be performed by the query",
            "const": "get_messages_by_id"
        },
        "params": {
            "description": "[Array] of objects containing each a channel and the list of ids from that channel",
            "type": "object",
            "additionalProperties": false,
            "properties": {
                "message_ids_by_channel_id": {

>                     "type": "array",

Reviewer 3: I also changed this to use a map.

                    },
                    "minItems": 0,
                    "$comment": "Return value for a `catchup` request"
                },
                {
                    "$ref": "result/messages_by_channel.json",
                    "$comment": "Return value for a `get_messages_by_id` request"
                },
                {
                    "type": "object",
                    "additionalProperties": false,
                    "properties": {
                        "serverId": {
                            "description": "[Base64String] server public key",
                            "type": "string",
                            "contentEncoding": "base64"
                        }

>                     }

Reviewer 4: why do you need this? 🤔

Reviewer 3: We are not sure anymore where this came from in `answer.json` but it is removed now 😄
